Hello and welcome back!
In this video, we're going to be fixing the formation
movement, because in our game right now we have an
enemy formation, and it gets stuck, when it goes to
one of the edges of the play space. And
this is a problem because we really don't want that behavior in the
final game. So, we want to fix this issue before
we release it, because we need it for the game to be playable.
So, let's just take a look at the issue, in a little bit more detail
to see exactly what's going on. So, if we jump into
Unity, right now, and we have our game ready and setup.
We have this EnemyFormation object, which is right here in the
middle of our play space, and the play space is defined by the edges
of the camera. So now, if I press play, look at what happens.
This is pretty much standard behavior. We have
the EnemyFormation moving back and forth and bouncing off
the edges of the play space, which is exactly what we want.
However, let me pause the game and change the EnemyFormation
to have a higher speed, let's say 25, and
look at the behavior again.
Immediately, the enemy formation gets stuck on
one of the edges of the play space. This is definately
not behavior we want, when we release the final game.
And this occurs at 25 on my machine,
but it might occur at 5 for yours or 6 on somebody
else's or 7 on your player's. We don't know what that limit
is. There's a systematic issue with the way
that we move the formation, thus causing this, and we want to fix it
so that it doesn't matter what speed your computer is running at, this
still won't occur. So, let's take a look at the
code responsible for moving the EnemyFormation.
If we take a look at the Enemy Spawner's Update function,
we can see that we're making the decisions of that movement
in this function right here. In particular,
on line 41, 42, and 43, we have an if
statement, which is where we make the decision about which direction we
should be moving in. So, something is wrong with
this Update function. Something we're doing, in this Update
function, is causing the incorrect behavior,
and it's going to be your job
to find out why that is. So,
find the assumption that you're making, that's causing this behavior
and root it out, and I'll see you in just a few
seconds, when you've done that.
How did it go? Did you find out what's going wrong? Let's
take a look together! So, if I jump in
I can take a look at my formation, and my play
space. So, my play space is defined by the
Main Camera, and we can see here, the edges of
the play space
or rather the edges of the formation, which is the inner box,
the inside box are inside the Main
Camera. Now, if the inner box, the
formation, comes outside of the Main Camera,
what's going to happen? Well, our code currently, if we take a
look at it, the code currently simply
toggles the direction of travel. So, if we're traveling right,
in this case, it'll simply say well let's start moving
left. So, we start moving left and we
expect to go back inside of the play space, so that
the play space is now containing the
EnemyFormation, however that is not always the
case. That is our incorrect assumption.
We're assuming that every time we toggle the direction,
at the next Update, we will have completely returned
inside the play space, however that's not
always the case. Let's imagine I toggle my direction
here and I start moving back to the left,
and at the next Update I'm still outside of the
play space. What happens there? Well, what
happens is, I toggle my direction again, but this
time instead of toggling it from moving right to moving left, I
toggle it from moving left to moving right, which means I continue
to be outside of the play space. And this loop keeps happening,
and every Update, I change the direction of travel
and that's why we're getting stuck on the edges of the
play space. So, the issue in the code and the assumption
we're making is, we're assuming that every time we toggle the direction
we will return to be inside of the play space. That's not
the case! Let's jump into our code to fix that issue right now.
So right now, we're toggling the direction
on line 42, that I have highlighted right here.
What we want to do is, instead of toggling the direction, is set the direction
given the two different conditions. We've got
two conditions here. When we're outside of the left edge
and when we're outside of the right edge. And
what I want to do is separate those two conditions into two separate
if statements, so that we catch the right condition
and change the direction appropriately. So, let's do
that right now with an else if statement, by going
else if, and then, extracting
one of the conditions out to the second if
statement. So, I'm extracting this second
condition out to the else if statement,
and I'm going to put the appropriate value, set the value
instead of toggling the movement direction. So I'm going to say
movingRight. And what's
the direction of movement we're expecting in this
case? Well, if the right edge is beyond the maximum,
we're expecting to have to turn back to the left, so
to move left so moving right will be false.
And what happens when the left
edge of our formation is beyond the minimum, while we
want to start moving right to go back into our
play space. So, we remove this and
instead of toggling moving right, we'll set it to
true. Now, we can save
and jump back into our game and see whether
I've fixed the issue. So, let's press
play and see what happens! Now, we can see they're
moving very very quickly, but they're still not going outside of the
play space. And that's exactly the behavior we want, so that
no matter what the speed is, no matter what the ratio speed
to frame rate etc., no matter what those speeds are
it still remains inside the play space.
That's the behavior we want and that is how we fix the
getting stuck on the edge issue. Now, you should know
how to fix those kind of issues, when items
or GameObjects get stuck on the edge conditions
and how to solve them. I hope you've enjoyed this video, I'll see you
in the next one! Bye for now!